INTRO:

This is the presentation of my master thesis. 

The subject concerns generating and verifying hardware with more than one level. 

SLIDE 1, INTRODUCTION:

-1 >> The idea is to generate ARMs advanced high performance bus architecture.
      
      It is generated at the electronic system level and register transfer level 
      for a set number of masters and slaves. 

      Properties are generated from the ESL model and automatically refined such 
      that they hold on the RTL design.

-2 >> The two main goals are that a high level of abstraction is achieved in the ESL
      model. 

      At the same time, the ESL must be a sound abstraction of the RTL.


SLIDE 2, RTL OVERVIEW:

-1 >> First, lets introduce the RTL model.

      To reduce design time, in other words to avoid reinventing the wheel, a
      trusted open source AHB architecture is used. It is implemented in VHDL,
      it correctly follows the AHB protocol and it offers a range of arbitration schemes.

-2 >> The architecture is interfaced with agents, which are designed from scratch.
      They carry out the AHB protocol on one side, and offers a simple blocking interface
      on the other. Now the burden of implementing the protocol does not fall on the user.
      The slave agents insert wait states to extend the transfer until the slave has processed the request. 
 
      The agents in the generator only support single transfers. Support for split and retry 
      response types are not implemented. Burst transactions are only shown as a proof of concept and 
      is covered at the end of this presentation.    

SLIDE 3, ESL OVERVIEW:

-1 >> The figure on the right is a top-level diagram of the ESL model for two masters and three slaves. 

      Due to parallelism between the master agents, they are required to subside in their own SystemC-PPAs.
      This lowers abstraction, but it is a necessary evil. There are a range of reasons why this is the case, the most
      important one is state explosion. 

      A blocking interface with the emulated port synchronizes the pipeline, whereas the remainder of the master 
      interface is communicated over shared ports.

-2 >> The bus architecture/interconnect is referred to as the bus matrix, at the ESL it includes the slave agents.

      The bus interacts with the master agents in a pipeline. All three stages of this pipeline handles requests and
      are therefore important states. The bus interacts with the slaves through blocking ports and receives a status
      for all transfers. This status is communicated back to the masters regardless of transfer direction. This equalizes
      the latencies for read and write transactions.

SLIDE 4, PORT EMULATION:   

-1 >> A port emulation is required in this implementation. Consider the figure on the right. 
      The left state machine is part of the master agent FSM whereas the right is the complete FSM
      of the bus matrix.

-2 >> A number of masters can be requesting the bus. There can simultaenously be one master in each of the
      two transfer phases. The requests as well as advancement through the phases for two master are all handled 
      in a single time point, or on one clock edge.

-3 >> Synchronizing the pipeline while maintaining a desirable level of abstraction is achieved through use of the
      blocking interface. There is only one issue.

-4 >> The generated properties only allow interaction with a single port per state/time point. The emulated port
      enables a single port for use in the bus matrix, such that the generated properties can be refined to hold on the design.
      As a trade-off, the emulated port can now not be verified for the same reason that it is implemented.     
 
SLIDE 5, PORT SOUNDNESS:

-1 >> So how is the ESL a sound abstraction of the RTL? 

      A Fixed-priority arbitration scheme is chosen in this implementation. It is chosen for simplicity. 
      The arbitration is formally verified in the bus matrix PPA. This arbitration is easily mirrored to 
      the emulated port module since it is a simple if-else conditional statement, and priority is incremental from 0 and up.

      The port receives a synchronization signal from the bus matrix.

-2 >> It fetches the request from the highest priority master and unblocks it from the pipeline without
      calling a wait function.    

-3 >> It forwards the request to the bus matrix, and unblocks any master which is blocked in either transfer phase, again
      without calling a wait.

-4 >> This allows the bus matrix and either agent to advance the pipeline and transfer phases in synchrony, regardless of the choice
      in model timing. It works for all configuration sizes, it is verified through simulation of both RTL and ESL. It is, however, 
      only a temporary solution and will ideally be replaced with a formally verified alternative in the future.   

SLIDE 6, COMPLETENESS:

-1 >> Aside from the emulated port, the property sets prove completeness on the architecture modules. 
      Completeness is proven in the master agent, all I/O signals are listed in the completeness description
      and all properties and completeness checks hold. The properties are in no way constrained. The state
      of the master agent is added as an output to its cluster.

-2 >> This state, or simply the state of the default master is added as an input to the bus matrix cluster. 
      There is no way of determining if a transfer is in progress or not, if it is the default master in its
      data phase. Therefore this signal is used to determine the state of the bus matrix. 

      Otherwise, as with the master agents, all I/O signals are listed in the completeness description, all properties 
      and completeness checks hold without constraints.

SLIDE 7, COMPLETENESS CONTINUED:

-1 >> The signal macros representing the emulated port interface in the agent and matrix are handled with some care.
      
      The guide for verification of clusters advise to refine signal macros using the same top-level signals in both
      clusters. 

      Here the top level signals of request, grant and ready are used in the sync and notify in the agent.
      The ready notify is an abstract signal and does not exist in the RTL, it is given abstract values to satisfy the properties. 

-2 >> Similarily, the same top level signals request, ready and grant are used on the bus matrix side of the emulated port. 
  
      The notify at the bottom is however a combination of two signals for each master agent in the system. 
      It is refined to represent the logic of these signals as they are used in the RTL. As long as this
      behaviour is guaranteed within the port, it should not leave a gap in verification. 

      This signal funcionally represents grant at the ESL, but it is not sufficient to satisfy the determination test.
      grant is added to the shared interface as a purely symbolic signal at the ESL. 

SLIDE 8, SIMULATION:

-1 >> Simulation models are generated for both ESL and RTL
      They are designed such that they perform operations and verify
      functionality on equal principles.

-2 >> Master and slave dummies are designed which perform simple read and write
      operations. The slaves count number of transactions, when the number of 
      transactions reaches 1 million, the simulation is ended. 

-3 >> The slaves are given ID numbers. This ID is either encoded in the write data 
      by the master and decoded by the slave, or encoded in the response data by the
      slave and decoded by the master.   

-4 >> The slave asserts that it is indeed the slave that the master intended to access. 
      The master asserts that the response it receives originates from the slave that it accessed.
      This checks that the payloads are sent and received between target and initiator as intended.

SLIDE 9, SIMULATION TIME COMPARISON

-1 >> Time comparisons of the simulation models truly highlight the efficiency of ESL simulation.
      This graph shows simulation times of configurations with 1,2 and 3 masters at the RTL, and all configurations
      of the ESL at the bottom. The x axis is amount of slaves in the configuration, and the y axis is time in seconds.

      Be aware that the slowest simulation is actually configurations with a single master, and then configurations
      with only two masters. This is due to the internal latency, or lack of parallelism within the master agents. 
      It merely requires more clock cycles to complete the 1 million transfers compared to configurations with 3 or 
      more masters. 

      The ESL model is unaffected by this latency, or any change in configuration size.

-2 >> now larger configurations are added to the graph, with 5, 10 and 15 masters, showing the effect of configuration size 
      on simulation time.  
      
SLIDE 10, PROPERTIES AND PROOF TIMES

-1 >> The amount of properties generated from the ESL model is relatively low for any configuration.
      The graph on the left show the property graph for the bus matrix dependent on number of slaves.
      The amount of properties are independent of amount of masters connected to the system. 
      
      This results in numerous vacuous properties or unreachable witnesses in configurations with 1 master, 
      and some in configurations with 2. They remain in the configuration due to issues with the case split test 
      when they are removed. This is also the case when the ESL model is modified such that the properties are never 
      generated in the first place. This is likely due to the emulated port. They are vacuous or unreachable because
      they cover a state of the pipeline which can not be fulfilled by anything less than three masters. 

      The proof time of the property set is dependent on the amount of masters and slaves. 
      In the graph on the right, a selection of configuration sizes are displayed. 
      The times shown are the proof times for the property set run with a single core.
      There are variations in the proof times of each property, but this is small enough that
      the property check is highly parallelizable. 

      The master agent is not graphically displayed as it only has 11 properties and takes
      mere seconds to prove, regardless of configuration size.    

SLIDE 11, STARVATION:

-1 >> Fixed-priority arbitration was implemented to ensure soundness with respect to the emulated port. 
      The downside of this arbitration is that it leaves masters vulnerable to starvation. 

-2 >> Starvation is inherently a time, or rate dependant phenomenon. How is this reflected in an untimed model?
      
      Consider the figure on the right: If a master starves or not depends on its priority, it depends how fast higher priority
      masters can or will request anew after returning from the data phase. And it depends on the length of the transfers occupying the bus
      while higher priority masters are otherwise busy.

-3 >> The simulation time affects the starvation, what takes a certain number of clock cycles at the RTL may take zero time at the ESL.
      Context switches affect the rate, regardless of using zero or nonzero times. 

-4 >> With systems of above three masters, the pipeline can be full while masters compete for a grant. There are cases where the fourth 
      master starves forever because the first master has time to return from the data phase and request anew while the second and third master are still
      occupying both transfer phases. 

SLIDE 12, STARVATION COMPARISON

-1 >> So is there a problem here?

      Comparisons of the occurances of starvation has been carried out on every configuration on both levels. 
      Delays between transfers are introduced to see which delay is required before each master is granted.  
      The graphs on the left show the RTL model, the right shows the ESL model.

      For transfers out of range, a fourth master does not starve in the RTL model, whereas the same is not true
      for the ESL model. A wait statement can be inserted to compensate for this. 

-2 >> The case is more complicated if zero wait time is used, and the waits are measured in amount of context switches.

-3 >> As can be seen, the RTL model have great variation between the types of transfers and occurances of starvation.
      This variation does not exist in the ESL model, therefore it is not safe to say that a configuration of four or
       more masters is sound for a system of arbitrary complexity,
       even when a wait statement is inserted as discussed for the out of range transfer.

-4 >> Using random wait times merely show that the probability of a master receiving a grant is strictly reduced. This is provided
      that zero and non-zero wait times are never intermixed.

-5 >> What this indicates, is that it is feasible to implement a monitor, which over approximates when a master starves. What it accomplishes is
      a guarantee that a given configuration is sound, otherwise the simulation is halted and the user is notified.

      This is provided that two restrictions are imposed. One is that every context switch or simulation time increment which is counted in the monitor
      can be attributed to an actual clock cycle in the RTL. The second is that there are restrictions on how many wait states a slave can insert, or that this is 
      at least accounted for in the monitor.

SLIDE 13, GENERATOR:

-1 >> The system generator is comprised of two parts. The first part is the hardware generator. 
      It generates corresponding architectures at the ESL and RTL.
      The generator is a C++ program which takes number of masters and slaves as input arguments.
      It reads the slave address ranges from a customizable file and generates the systems based
      on this information.

-2 >> The program calls a DeSCAM plugin that is dedicated to the AHB implementation.
      The same plugin is called with either the master agent or bus matrix. 
      It uses naming in the abstract model to identify signals, registers and states.
      These macros are generated and refined accordingly.
      The property set is printed and timepoints are modified by checking for certain assumptions and commitments.

       A completeness description is created.   

SLIDE 14, CONCEPT: BURST TRANSFERS:

-1 >> Finally, the burst transactions are demonstrated as a proof of concept. 

      The demonstration is a four beat incremental burst transfer, operated on a configuration
      of a single master and slave. The address is constrained to stay within the address range
      of the slave. The concept is applicable to all burst types except one, and any
      configuration size.

      The payloads of existing ports are extended to account for burst transactions. 
      These payloads can be shared between all transfer types. The exceptions are shared
      output ports, which is the majority of the interface between agent and bus. 
      Shared out ports are not practical to model burst transactions.

-2 >> For this reason extra ports are added to model the burst transfers on the 
      master side of the interface. However, the burst write port is strictly 
      symbolic, and only serves to determine signals in verification. 
      Reading the burst write port signals the end of the data phase, 
      so the payload does not reach its target. Therefore the data is transferred
      through a helper payload over the request port at an earlier stage. 
 
      
SLIDE 15, BURSTS CONTINUED:

-1 >> The payload include address, data and any control signal in need of determination.
      One example of such a control signal is the htrans signal. It must be determined
      in the master agent for every beat of the burst. The encodings are merely concatenated 
      at the ESL, as seen in line 1. seq stands for sequential, nonseq stands for nonsequential, meaning start of transfer. 
      In the property macros, time shifted values of htrans are concatenated. 

      The data variable of line 2-3 show the example of sharing the payload. 
      This is a four beat burst, so the hwdata4 is simply zeroed to signal that
      it is an irrelevant variable. 
      Similarly, in the macro refinement, conditional statements check the burst type
      and apply the appropriate time shift for the signal, or in this case eliminates it
      by assigning a zero. 

SLIDE 16, BURSTS CONTINUED 2:

-1 >> When bursts are added to the system, it is necessary that the property set proves completeness on the design. 
      The main challenge with this is signal determination. 
      Key signals of the interface between master agent and bus matrix on both sides must be determined throughout the beats
      of the burst.
      With exception of the ready signal, it is sufficient to determine them once for each beat of the burst. 
      For this reason it is recommended to allow certain signals to be undetermined in time points where they dont change value.
      This is to avoid cumbersome payloads filled with duplicate signals. 

-2 >> The duration of each burst must always be known. Luckily, the wait states inserted to process the request in the slaves
      are not part of the burst transaction. So no constraints are needed. 
      However, this means that undefined incremental burst transfers must be excluded from the implementation. 

      Finally, the default slave response is disabled in this demonstration. It is simply not known to the master agent whether or not
      the transfer is in or out of range. For this reason the transfer is of undefined length unless the address is constrained. 
      A solution to this is to check early for errors in the ESL, and simply abort the burst if there is an error. The only challenge is
      that one must know that the error comes from the default slave. One solution to this is to always encode nonzero data in errors in slaves.

SLIDE 17, WHAT REMAINS:

-1 >> To conlcude this presentation, I would like to discuss what remains to generate a complete AHB system
      at the ESL, which is a sound abstraction of the RTL.

      An alternative to the emulated port is needed. This might be a dedicated port interface which is added to SystemC-PPA. 
      Without this alternative, it is not safe to modify the interface, or implement any other arbitration scheme. 

-2 >> If fixed-priority arbitration is used, a monitor is necessary to ensure that configurations of four or more masters are sound. 

-3 >> Adding burst transactions to the generator, as discussed this excludes the incremental bursts of undefined length.

-4 >> Adding split and retry response types. It is strictly not necessary to implement in the slaves, as they can be asserted as AHB lite
      slaves. But support for these response types must be implemented in the masters to fully comply with the protocol.

 
       

